xlii INTRODUCTION.

not to employ more forcible words, more than sixty
years before the Battle of the StandarcL at which
Aelred describes him as aehieving a memorable renown.
It is an utter impossibility, on the face os it, and it
effectually discredits the statement of the Genealogy.
But when we try to pass beyond merely negative
allegations, such as this, we do not find much to
advance in addition to what is said by Aelred. Brave,
able, foresceing, prudent, wise, good, and eager to do
good—we see that he was all this and more ; but as
to particulars of his parentage, up-bringing, training,
service, or as to the way in which he became enfeoffed
at all, and much more so largely enfeoffed, who was the
donor, or to whom he was successor, only a few hints
can be found of such a nature as to suggest that perhaps
inquiry might be rewarded by something in the way of
discovery or acquisition. We undoubtedly find him the
occupant of large estates3 but there is a something, so
to speak, elusory, almost verging on the mysterious, in
the very mention of these estates He must, like the
Brus, like more than one or two of the Barons named in
connection with some or other of the grants recorded in
the present Chartulary‚ have been lord of mauors by the
score. And yet when we try to realise the extent and
the locale of these abeunding lands and territories, we
find ourselves baffied almost at the outset. We know
that he held lands and lordships in Northumberland
and in Bedfordshirc, that Helmsley, Bilsdale, Kirkham,
with VVestow, Whitwell, Thixendale‚ Gar-ton, and with
those indefinitcly localised placeS, Hwersletorp and
Linton, were his ; we infer, with a precision amounting

